#labels Phase-Requirements
= Client/Server Protocol =

Alchemy Database uses the NOSQL data-store redis' client/server protocol. Redis has a very simple, powerful, and efficient ASCII protocol for transferring data via TCP, UDP, and Unix Domain Sockets.
<br/>

Redis protocol is specified [http://redis.io/topics/protocol here]. This is the starting point for learning about the protocol, and this is where the protocol is defined.
<br/>

Alchemy Database's commands basically have the same syntax, except SQL Keywords are required, so clients need to insert them where appropriate.<br/>

Alchemy Database responses are 100% redis compliant (e.g. CREATE TABLE -> +OK, SELECT `*` FROM table -> Multi-Bulk)

==List of number of arguments and placement of SQL keywords for Alchemy Database commands==
  # CREATE TABLE has 4 arguments "CREATE TABLE table_name (col1 type,col2 type,,,)"
  # DROP TABLE has 2 arguments "DROP TABLE table_name"
  # DESC TABLE has 1 argument "DESC table_name"
  # DUMP TABLE has 1 argument "DUMP table_name"
  # CREATE INDEX has 6 arguments "CREATE INDEX index_name ON table (column)"
  # DROP INDEX has 2 arguments "DROP INDEX index_name"
  # INSERT has 5 arguments "INSERT INTO table VALUES (val1,val2,,,)"
  # SELECT has 6 arguments "SELECT column1,column2,,, FROM tbl1,tbl2, WHERE where_clause"
  # UPDATE has 6 arguments "UPDATE table SET col1=val1,col2=val2,,, WHERE where_clause"
  # DELETE has 5 arguments "DELETE FROM table WHERE where_clause"
  # SCANSELECT has 6 arguments "SCANSELECT column1,column2,,, FROM tbl WHERE where_clause"
  # LUA has 1+ arguments "LUA function_name [arg1 arg2 arg3 etc]"
 
Optional Syntaxes
  # DUMP can also dump to Mysql format, where it has 5 aguments "DUMP table_name TO MYSQL mysql_table_name"
  # DUMP can also dump to File, where it has 5 aguments "DUMP table_name TO FILE /home/me/table.txt"
  # SCANSELECT can also have 4 arguments when it has no where-clause "SCANSELECT column1,column2,,, FROM tbl"


===EXAMPLES===
The following examples do not explicitly write out the "\r\n" at the end of each line, but the protocol does require them.

*SELECT* Example:
{{{
SELECT user.name, user_info.address FROM user, user_info WHERE user.id = user_info.user_id AND user.id = 7
}}}
would be transformed into the following in the redis line protocol:
{{{
*6
$6
SELECT
$28
user.name, user_info.address
$4
FROM
$15
user, user_info
$5
WHERE
$43
user.id = user_info.user_id AND user.id = 7
}}}
  * The first line is the number of arguments
  * Lines that start w/ $X, mean that the next line has X bytes
  * that is the whole protocol, it is straightforward.
<br/>
This protocol seems to have a lot of overhead when compared to a binary protocol. In practice the overhead the protocol produces is not that significant when network overhead and various operating system page copy steps are taken into account. The upside is, it is human readable ... writing clients is a breeze, you can even tap into data streams using the linux _tcpdump_ command.
<br/>

*CREATE TABLE* example
{{{
*4
$6
CREATE
$5
TABLE
$10
table_name
$40
(id INT primary key, name TEXT, age INT)
}}}

*INSERT* example:
{{{
*5
$6
INSERT
$4
INTO
$5
table
$6
VALUES
$48
(a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p)
}}}

*UPDATE* example:
{{{
*6
$6
UPDATE
$4
table
$5
SET
$37
a=1, b = 2, c=3, d=4, e=5, f=6, g = 7
$5
WHERE
$6
id = 7
}}}

This redis protocol has been implemented [http://redis.io/clients in over 20 languages in redis], so supporting Alchemy Database ONLY requires adding 14 commands to these clients, as Alchemy Database has not introduced any changes to the core protocol.<br/>

Ported libraries for Alchemy Database include 
  # Ruby client: http://github.com/JakSprats/redis-rb
  # Java Client: https://github.com/JakSprats/jedis 
  # Python Client: https://github.com/JakSprats/redis-py
  # Node.js client: http://github.com/JakSprats/node_AlchemyDatabase (dependency [https://github.com/mranney/node_redis node_redis] - thanks to [http://ranney.com/ Matt Ranney]) 
  # C# Client: https://github.com/mythz/ServiceStack.Redis/tree/master/src/ServiceStack.Redis/Alchemy -By [https://github.com/boxerab Aaron Boxer]
  # PHP Client: http://github.com/JakSprats/predis
  # Lua client: https://github.com/JakSprats/Alchemy-Database/blob/master/redis_unstable/tests/lua/external_alchemy.lua
  # Embedded Lua: https://github.com/JakSprats/Alchemy-Database/blob/master/redis_unstable/tests/lua/alchemy.lua

==ENTIRE PROTOCOL==
A link to [http://code.google.com/p/alchemydatabase/wiki/EntireProtocol the Entire Protocol] illustrated though examples.

===NOTES===
  * in the future, the Ruby, PHP, Java, Lua, and Python clients will follow the example of the Node.js and C# clients and become very small patches that are 100% on top of the redis clients.
  * *SELECT* is used by both redis (select DB) and Alchemy Database (select `*` from table where id = 1) in different capacities. Clients must either override redis' default SELECT functionality to accept either 1 (e.g. select DB) or 5 arguments (e.g. select `*` from table where "id = 1") OR come up w/ a two different commands for redis' and Alchemy Database' select functionality (the former is recommended, but requires overriding and is more complex)